# Question 1

_"Reflection" as a concept has been leveraged across various disciplines and media forms, sometimes in relation to person as subject (i.e. reflective practitioner), sometimes in relation to person as object (i.e. designing for people to experience reflection). Discuss how reflection has been approached in different fields and whether the subject-object distinction makes a difference to how we understand reflection._

## Introduction

## Person as subject

In his 1982 text "The Reflective Practitioner," Donald Schön sets up his argument for "reflection-in-action." In this understanding, the designer/practitioner is constantly relying on past knowledge as they are in the midst of the creation process and combines this "knowing-in-action" with a reflection on the material aspects of the design itself. Schön states, 

_"There is some puzzling, or troubling, or interesting phenomenon with which the individual is trying to deal. As he tries to make sense of it, he also reflects on the understandings which have been implicit in his action, understandings which he surfaces, criticizes, restructures, and embodies in further action."_

For Schön, reflection happens in the designer's mind, often unconsciously, as they work in dialogue with the process, materials, and a specific design goal. This idea was in contrast to the prevailing concept of applied theory, where the practitioner was taught the foundational rules of craft and then applied them towards a desired end. Instead, using the examples of architects, big-league baseball pitchers, jazz musicians, and more, Schön describes the phenomena of "thinking on your feet" as a practitioner makes these subtle changes towards a desired goal. Interestingly, he breaks free from Csikszentmihalyi's concept of "flow," stating that "much reflection-in-action hinges on surprise." Where Csikszentmihalyi's flow state denotes that the practitioner is unencumbered during the process, Schön believes it is the roadblocks and unexpected occurrences that lead to reflection. The practitioner can be surprised by what arises during the process and in conversation with their materials, creating something unexpected (or at least unplanned). In this way, the design is as much a product of the act of reflection as it is of the designer's craft.

Since the publication of "Reflective Practitioner," Schön's concept of reflection-in-action has found footing amongst many in the design and education communities. Most notably, Christopher Frayling applies these ideas to research, proposing the idea of "research through art and design." Frayling argues that in research through art and design the creation process could be harnessed for artistic/designerly knowledge. His idea is that the process can answer the question, "How can I tell what I think till I see what I make and do?" Rather than use reflection to understand the project at hand, this research-in-action reflection seeks to better understand the overall act of design.

Various methods have been proposed for how that reflection can inform research. Redstrom explores the relationship between the design act and research, introducing the concepts of parallels, sequencing, and intermediaries, placing reflection at different stages of the process. However, in each of these, the reflection happens on the part of the designer, assessing the success of each design iteration either in retrospect or during the process itself.

In their paper "Pre-Reflection-in-Action: Rethinking Schön's Reflective Practice Through the 'Habits of Design Artistry,'" Eklund et al. take issue with Schön's use of 'conversation' in describing how the practitioner relates to their craft. They believe that this language misconstrues the underlying nature of that experience. Instead, relying on John Dewey's notions of "thought-in-action" and especially "habit," they argue that "thought properly integrated within action is a matter of undergoing the immediate unfolding of situational-ideational qualities not representing—it is in essence 'pre-reflective.'" In their estimation, Schön's use of the word 'conversation' divorces thought from action when, in reality, the two are more intertwined. Putting all of this aside, their use of "pre-reflection" as a term still uses the practitioner/designer as the subject, merely focusing on the mechanics of how exactly that reflection happens.

From an artistic point of view, we see the concept of process reflection echoed in Frank Chimero's "Shape of Design," where he states

"The creative process, in essence, is an individual in dialogue with themselves and the work. \[...] It is a dance of switching contexts, a pitter-patter pacing across the studio floor that produces a tight feedback loop between mark-making and mark-assessing. The artist, when near, is concerned with production; when far, he enters a mode of criticism where he judges the degree of benefit (or detriment) the previous choice has had on the full arrangement."

Chimero's "dance of switching contexts" can be seen in several artistic practices. It is the painter assessing his canvas, but it is also the composer listening back to a piece on various speaker systems, the sculptor rotating a piece in their hands before firing, and the game designer adapting an experience based on feedback from a play session. Through all of these, reflection sits squarely in the experience of the designers themselves. It is the designer who reflects; the practitioner who assesses whether or not the thing they have made is successful.

This understanding of reflection can also be seen in a non-practitioner-based context, where a person might also discuss 'reflecting on an experience.' In this meaning, we think of reflection as thinking back on something to reconsider and reevaluate. It is similar to the artist reflecting on their canvas in that it hopes to provide new directions for moving forward but revolves around lived experience.

Reflection can also happen from a more removed place. In the design world, a post-mortem reflection is often used to evaluate the end state of a project. Schoffelen et al. argue for teaching this skill in "Making and reflecting via Playful Design Representations," where they find that students "merely realise design representations without consciously connecting them to their research question through reflecting on their process while doing so." This is in line with Schön's *reflecting-ON-action* which differs from reflection-in-action in that it happens after the project has concluded but still relates to the designer and their understanding of their craft.

## Person as object

We can also consider reflection a design goal, where a produced artwork, experience, or product is designed to encourage the reflective act. Within this context, the term has been employed in a number of ways.

One understanding of reflection has found a strong foothold in the academic world, where it becomes a desired state for learners. Numerous thinkers and educators have relied on Dewey's concept of 'reflective thought' as a goal for teaching. Dewey explains this state as

_"active, persistent, and careful consideration of any belief or supposed form of knowledge in the light of the grounds that support a form of knowledge in the light of the grounds that support it, and the further conclusions to which it tends."_

Dewey and those who follow focus on how reflection helps the learner learn. For them, the goal is the gaining of knowledge. Jennifer Moon, for instance, states that reflection is "a mental process of thinking about what we have done, learned, and experienced." This understanding of reflection is unambiguous and practical, something to be harnessed for a desired end outcome.

A more ambiguous reflection could also arise from experimental interactions. Lars Hallnäs and Johan Redström's "Slow Technology - Designing For Reflection" introduces the concept of "slow technology \[...] as a tool for making reflection inherent in design expression." They propose that slowing down, removing clarity, and building friction into designs can make the user reflect on the nature and role of technology in their life. A doorbell that influences several fans behind an array of fabric squares communicates something different from the usual chime, but what exactly? The user is left to consider these objects and interactions and what they might mean. This is similar to Rilla Khaled's proposal of a 'reflective game design,' where the designer designs to highlight questions over answers, disruption over comfort, and reflection over immersion. 

In their paper "Reflective Design," Phoebe Sengers et al., building on critical theory, argue for design that brings "unconscious aspects of experience to conscious awareness, thereby making them available for conscious choice." Specifically, they "expand on reflection-in-action by not waiting for surprise to occur but by intervening to create or stimulate these reflection triggers." This shifts the focus of reflection away from the nature of the designed object and instead on the nature of technology as a whole. They argue that by focusing on the user's critical reflection, designers are able to counter norms and create positive social effect.

The user could also instigate reflection themselves, reflecting on their own experience after the fact. Media criticism is an example of this: an end-user processes their experience with a given design object and documents their analysis and feelings. Clara Fernández-Vara, for instance, advocates for academic game analysis around topics like historical analysis, the communities of game players, interpretive analysis, or reflection on personal experiences while playing. This active internal reflection filters the experience of the designed object through a user's beliefs, background knowledge, preferences, and other aspects, and helps them to come to a new understanding of the material.

We can also see how the object/experience can be a way to elicit secondary reflection. In their paper "Contemplative Neuroaesthetics and Architecture: A Sensorimotor Exploration," Djebbara et al. use the term contemplation rather than reflection. For them, contemplation involves a "heightened level of awareness and an intentional focus on the present moment, fostering a state of deep reflection and non-judgmental engagement." Using examples from architecture, including the Rundetårn in Copenhagen, Denmark, Louis Kahn's Salk Institue in La Jolla, California, and the Chartres Cathedral in France, Djebbara et al. argue that these buildings, while not inherently objects of reflection themselves, can bring about states of deep contemplation/reflection in a viewer.

They also explore the differences between internally induced (IN-I) and externally induced (EX-I) contemplation techniques, which mirrors the distinction between what we have been referring to as person-as-subject vs. person-as-object. They argue that aesthetic experiences can externally induce the act of contemplation by creating an 'an embodied experience of presence.' Using this framework when thinking about how the practitioner approaches reflection could be beneficial. Internally-induced reflection aligns with what happens during and after the design process. In contrast, externally-induced reflection happens when the end-user interacts with a product designed for a reflective experience. 

## In Practice

After examining the different ways that reflection has been discussed over several fields, we, as designers, can approach and understand the concept of reflection from various angles. These different perspectives of reflection can create new opportunities for the design itself and for specific design goals. I break this into four categories of thought:

- Reflection THROUGH the design process
- Reflection ON the design process
- Reflection ON the designed object
- Reflection THROUGH the designed object

First, there is the concept of *reflecting through the design process*, which echoes Schön's concept of reflection-in-action, where the designer enters into conversation with their design during the process. The reflection happens concurrently with the process, where insights can be immediately applied, and even aid in reevaluating overall design goals. Design thinking and the general iterative design process could be seen as examples of this in action.

Second, we can treat the entire process itself as an object for reflection. In this lens of *reflecting on the design process* a designer looks back on the finished design and the process that led to that result as an overall instance for reflection. The common practice of design post-mortems fits into this view, where designers gain insight about the process (and their position as designers) by evaluating the successes and failures of a given outcome. From a distance, they can recognize new areas for development and apply these lessons in future work. This understanding also encompasses the more research-based focuses of Frayling and Redstrom, where, using techniques from grounded theory and social sciences, designers/researchers learn about the design process itself, creating knowledge for the broader design community.

Third, we can design objects that are the focal point of a reflective experience. *Reflection on the designed object* creates instances where the user encounters an object that challenges their expectations. These designs are often art objects, with critical design and speculative design as example approaches. Anthony Dunne's Faraday Chair, for example, uses a large Faraday cage to create a haven from electromagnetic fields, which causes the viewer to ask, "If the inside is empty, what is outside?" (Interestingly, the "chair" is actually a daybed. Faraday claims that "once electromagnetic fields are taken into consideration, conventional assumptions about everyday objects need to be reexamined.")

Lastly, we can design objects through which an external reflection can happen. *Reflection through the designed object* encompasses all the objects that create a state of reflection apart from reflecting on the nature of the object itself. These objects point towards something external upon which to reflect. In Critical Play, Mary Flanagan calls these the designs that "represent one or more questions about aspects of human life." 

## Conclusion

Through all of these applications, it seems that the direction from which the reflection is happening is perhaps less important than the desired end goals. The various definitions practitioners employ for 'reflection' highlight these goals. For example, Dewey's call for an "active, persistent, and careful consideration," stands in contrast with Redstrom's "moments of reflection and mental rest." Redstrom's understanding takes a more passive approach, while Dewey's hopes for active participation on the user's part. Additionally, for Dewey and those who use his definition for reflective learning, it is crucial that the thing to be learned is transmitted. This diverges from a more open-ended reflective experience where the takeaway is not so specific. Perhaps strangely, this open-ended reflection feels most at home in Schön's understanding of reflection-in-action, where the designer's surprise and subsequent application of insight is not and cannot be planned. 


